---
title: 'Why am I moving to UK?'
date: 2021-12-05
tags:
  - Personal
  - Career move
---

This blog explains my decision to quit Zomato and joining Amazon Cambridge.

# Why Am I Moving to the UK?

## Broadening Horizons

### From Zomato to Amazon
Working at Zomato has been an incredible experience. The engineering team here is top-notch, and I’ve had the opportunity to work on some truly innovative projects. However, Zomato’s customer base is primarily in India, which limited my exposure to international markets. I’ve always aspired to work for a company that delivers services globally. This desire led me to Amazon, a company known for its vast international presence and diverse customer base. Joining Amazon will allow me to contribute to projects that impact people all around the world, broadening my professional horizons significantly.

## Experiencing Life in a Different Country

### Embracing the UK Culture
Moving to the UK is an exciting adventure that promises a wealth of new experiences. Living in a different country means immersing myself in a new culture, meeting people from diverse backgrounds, and gaining fresh perspectives. It’s an opportunity to step out of my comfort zone, challenge myself, and grow both personally and professionally. I am looking forward to exploring the rich history and traditions of the UK, trying new foods, and participating in local customs. This experience will undoubtedly contribute to my personal development, making me a more well-rounded individual.

## Developing New Skills and Independence

### Stepping Out of My Comfort Zone
One of the most compelling reasons for my move is the chance to become more independent. Moving to a new country means managing all aspects of life on my own – from finding a place to live to navigating a new city and building a social network from scratch. This process will help me develop essential life skills, such as problem-solving, adaptability, and resilience. Moreover, living independently in a new environment will push me to take on new responsibilities and handle challenges confidently.

## Expanding Technical Expertise

### From Niche Projects to High-Scale Systems
At Zomato, I worked on very niche projects, such as mapping GPS pings. While these projects were intellectually stimulating and technically challenging, I yearned for the opportunity to work on broader backend systems with high scalability. Amazon, with its massive infrastructure and complex backend systems, seemed like the perfect place to achieve this goal. I am excited about the prospect of working on projects that handle vast amounts of data and serve millions of users globally. This experience will allow me to deepen my technical expertise and broaden my knowledge of large-scale system design and implementation.

## A Reversible Decision

### A Two-Way Door
One of the comforting aspects of this move is that it’s a two-way door decision. If, for any reason, I find that life in the UK isn’t what I expected or I miss my home country too much, I can always return to India. This flexibility gives me peace of mind, knowing that this move doesn’t have to be permanent if it doesn’t work out. It allows me to take this leap with confidence, knowing that I have the option to come back if needed.
